all political theorists are intentionists.
science is the formalization of intentionism. it speak of causation as if there is nothing in the world which something 'does not cause'.

intentionism is where individuals and groups believe that nothing worthwhile is going to happen unless it is made to happen. thus life becomes the job of making things happen the way the individual or group wants them to happen.

situationism acknowledges the natural primacy of the 'fielding' aspect of the hitting-fielding combination.

situational opportunity is the mother of intention. empty space does not orchestrate and shape assertive action, but opportunity-rich situations do. science and scientific thinkers look at dynamics framed by empty space, thus the only sourcing influence they can see is 'intention'.

"“That which gives the extraordinary firmness to our belief in causality is not the great habit of seeing one occurrence following another but our inability to interpret events otherwise than as events caused by intentions. It is belief in the living and thinking as the only effective force–in will, in intention–it is belief that every event is a deed, that every deed presupposes a doer, it is belief in the “subject.” Is this belief in the concept of subject and attribute not a great stupidity?” – Nietzsche, ‘Will to Power’ 484

nietzsche is pointing to this fundamental 'difference' that characterizes European civilization; i.e. it has put 'intentionism' into an unnatural primacy over 'situationism'.

western man believes that everything he does jumpstarts from out of his own creative genius, and denies that the first order of credit has to go to the amazing diversity he is included in that inductively orchestrates and shapes what he does. this amazing 'socket' of nature is what he is plugging into. only if he conceives of himself as an independent reason-driven machine residing and operating in a passive operating theatre, can he claim that his achievements are driven by HIS INTENTION.

nietzsche mocked darwinism's 'great stupidity' for trying to explain evolution in the one-sided terms of organismic intention [survival]. lamarck's theory had credited the excitation of the situational socket (field) for inductively evolving the assertive behaviour in the organism so that 'intention' was nothing more than 'appearances'. emerson also saw the inductive genius of nature as not only inhabiting the organism but creating it.

situationism is thus in an innate primacy over intentionism, ... IN NATURE.

Western civilized man's hubris inverts this, in his head, and proclaims that intentionism precedes situationism. in other words, he sees 'man's actions' and 'man's judgements (scientific and moral) as 'primary' [in science, this is achieved by imputing absolute space and absolute time reference framing]. since man sees his behaviour in the one-sided terms of 'intention-driven' and since intention needs direction, moral codes to guide intention arise to make a complete package out of this one-sided way of intellectually idealizing dynamics which extracts, notionally, human social dynamics from out of the full package of natures relational activity continuum.

Western civilized man believes that there is such a thing as a 'human social dynamic' that can be separated out from the overall transforming relational activity continuum, and thus he puts himself into an intellectually idealized 'operative reality' which is all about 'humans' [as if they were independent beings with internal process driven and directed behaviours] and 'what humans do' as if humans interact with one another out of the context of the relational activity continuum.

this is what comes of putting 'intentionism' into an unnatural primacy over 'situationism'; i.e. it puts humans (civilizeds) into an intellectually idealized 'operative reality', ... a fairyland inhabited by independent humans with internal process driven and directed behaviours that reside, operate and interact in a habitat that is independent of the inhabitants that reside, operate and interact within it.

Western civilization forms from humans teaching their children that the intentionist [scientific] fairyland where intellectual idealization is put into an unnatural primacy over the physical reality of our natural experience, is the 'primary reality'.

the cargo cult tribal members, who may have a fine life experience, who knows, since we cannot share another person's experience, look amusing to us because of their 'build it and they shall come' situationist approach to enticing the big metal birds to alight and disgorge wonderful presents from their shiny bellies, ... but if we suspend our mirth for a moment, we might see in this a people that acknowledges situationism. should the man go out with his club and his shopping list, beat up a woman and drag her home by her hair? or should man build a shelter and hang some fresh meat from the hunt therein, so that when he returns in the evening, he may find a lone female who, after sating her hunger and basking in the shelter's comfort, asleep in his bed.

the inverting of the natural order of 'situationism over intentionism' into a dysfunctional 'intentionism over situationism' is the characteristic feature of Western civilization which underlies the very different social dynamics of European civilizeds vis a vis the social dynamics of the world's indigenous 'sauvages'.

one does not have to be 'anti-civilization' and seek to 'destroy 'IT'. the hierarchical control structures are the artefacts of putting 'intentionism into an unnatural primacy over situationism' [i.e. putting intellectual idealizations into an unnatural primacy over our experience-based intuition].

the 'civilizeds' are people whose sociolinguistic mojo has bewitched their understanding. breaking out of the trance is the necessary and impending re-evolution.

and what can we say about all of the amazing 'scientific advances' that European civilization has architected and operationalized? much of their value is assigned on the basis of their contribution to the turbo-charging of human intentionism within the 'fairyland' 'operative reality' of a humanity separate from 'the rest of nature'. how would wolf and turtle speak for them in the talking circle. if the world is only given once, as a transforming relational activity continuum, then we would have to refer our evaluation to ongoing balance and harmonies in the relational activity continuum, rather than to 'human progress' in terms of man enhancing his [fairyland operative-reality-based] powers of intentionism.